Okay.
The tape is rolling.
I'll just put that there.
And tell me here, if you don't mind, a few general questions, how you see this fitting into the corpus, so to speak.
Well, I suppose in the most reductive sense, you know, there's been reductive.
These books have followed certain stages in my own life in some way or another.
And this one is, you know, they sort of echo some concerns that I've been recently living through.
I suppose family pictures would be the exception because it took me way, way back.
But, you know, in the recent, I would say, five or six years of my life,
Everyone has died.
There have been a lot of deaths.
My mother died a long time ago, but my father died, and he was in my care before then.
And my grandparents, who had lived into their 90s and were still there, you know, and completely with it, and sort of the center of our family died.
A very, what we call, good death.
My dad's death was not a good death.
This is all within the last five years?
Yeah, and I really feel, you know, I've always been sort of death-ridden and, you know, aware of mortality in a way that I think is probably highly inappropriate, I mean, from a very young age.
Can I interject something?
You talked with Alan Mundy.
Alan, do you know what Sunday was yesterday?
No, I said the Shakespearean birth game.
I said, do you know that he died on his 52nd birthday?
No, I didn't.
I said, do you know how old I'm going to be in my next birthday?
Me too.
Next month.
I'll be 52 in November.
It's a little further off.
But he died on his 52nd birthday.
And I said, every time, he said, most guys, it's with their fathers.
I said, oh, when I passed Keith to 29 and Byron, I said, I've always said, what have I done?
Anyway, I share the, what I'm trying to say, I guess, is I share the spirit.
Oh, yeah, just craziness about it.
And, you know, my mother died at 60, and I've always been like, shoot, that seems very bad.
That's pretty darn good.
And I think, you know, eight years from now, you know.
So at any rate, I think I've always been a little crazy anyhow.
And then I think this book, this really emerges out of these kind of really, I see a red light.
I think it emerges out of those kinds of things.
And then a lot of other sort of interesting concerns, but most sort of directly.
That is pretty interesting.
So it's not a question of externalizing the art from your life.
It's impossible.
Yeah, and in a way, I feel that at this point, the first time...
I'm going to line them up.
I'm going to have another one of those guys myself.
Unbelievable ways to go.
Yeah.
That's a good idea.
It's terrible.
Yeah, it's equally my fault.
I came in here.
I was early, too.
Yeah, me too.
Always early.
With Sally, I said, Sally, how long have you been here?
She said, I've been here since about four.
I said, you sure she's not here?
And she said, no.
Yeah.
Sally is my, I'm sorry, go ahead.
No, you too.
Go ahead.
And I forget what the question was.
Well, we were talking, I guess, about externalizing and
It's impossible to externalize events from your life, to separate, I guess, your art from your life.
For me, I mean, there are people who work much, at a much greater distance than photography.
I mean, I don't work as close as someone like Updike has, or Roth has inside.
But, you know, I do work fairly close.
I mean, no one has ever pointed a finger at me and said, you know, you used me.
But people have said, I told you that story.
And I said, I know you did.
But you weren't necessarily using events.
I guess you were using feelings.
Yeah.
And they were...
energizing in a way.
Yeah, when something someone tells you suddenly seems to work as you append it to one of your characters, it's probably the most unlikely character to, from their perspective, to append it.
Were you mindfully responding to these deaths?
Well, I was very preoccupied with the whole idea.
Preoccupied?
Yeah, with death and dying for a while, and sort of what seemed to be
It seems to be.
I mean, you know, I've always sort of thought of life as a kind of awful thing we've moved through with wonderful, wonderful moments embedded in.
And, you know, I've always thought of myself as someone who has been able to enjoy those moments.
I think, you know, with the death of these wonderful old people that I have loved so dearly, I really began to see you since, you know, how...
Life closes the same way for everyone.
It's very diminishing and hard.
I'd always sort of known that intellectually, but I really witnessed it and began to, you know, imagine it for myself.
You know, I will not be as I have been.
I will be, you know.
Is this two years between novels?
It is.
Was this a work in progress when the last one came out, or was this something more or less... I think this one was something I wasn't ready to even focus on.
I mean, I wrote the last one and sort of... Because they really are different.
Yeah, right.
There's no question about it.
Right.
But I wrote the last one sort of in the middle of these dying convests, and I sort of, I thought, I need to be doing something, and I chose something that was of great interest to me.
I felt as though I were writing a long essay about love, in a way, in that book.
And it seemed very... But it seemed very remote from the things which were driving me crazy and, you know, making me very sad.
And it helped me turn away from them.
And then I think this was the book that was waiting for me after that.
In terms of formulating the story and...
What came first?
I mean, were these emotions, was it these emotions that were, you know, bubbling?
It's hard for me to remember what came first.
I always ask these creative questions.
I knew it would be about this old woman, and I knew that I wanted, finally, to be writing about this whole race thing that was part of my own growing up.
The race thing is a matter of, again, it does interest me how that works its way into this.
And, you know, I began to read a lot about race and read a lot of the history of that particular time in Chicago, too.
And just these, they just all began to slowly pull together.
I wasn't sure what, you know, who in the family would be the main character.
And then I decided, at one point, I thought I would have it be a first-person narration by this man, Alan.
But I thought I might, then I sort of saw how...
Tightly, I'd have to be with him and thought I might like to be more expansive on that.
He's a very interesting character.
I love him.
I love them all, actually.
I love writing this book.
It's very complicated.
I would say it may even be your most complex novel in many respects.
Do you agree with that or maybe not?
I mean, there are a lot of things that you are addressing.
Yeah.
I think it's a toss-up between it and family pictures.
Yeah, family pictures.
Yeah.
Mmm.
Wonderful.
Jolts you awake.
I love spices.
Yeah.
We need to find them for you to have more wine.
Hot and sour.
Lemongrass and shrimp soup.
A number of your critics.
We talk about relationships, which are always in your books.
Is this something you do mindfully as well, or is it just what interests you as a writer?
Yeah, it's what I think is interesting.
It's what I read other books for.
It's why I'm drawn to certain writers myself.
I think it's at the heart of more fiction than people really... I'm always sort of startled that people point this out about my work, because it seems to me it's at the heart of a great deal of fiction.
And that somehow I've gotten labeled as the sort of writer about the family and sort of human relationships, but I thought that's what fiction was about, quite honestly.
And I think that it has been historically.
I mean, we come from the British novel, and the British novel is a novel of domestic relations.
And...
some sort of turning out to the world, which I think I also do, you know, in that tradition.
But I think the, you know, the American novel as interpreted by men has been quite different from that.
And so people are starting to think of the novel once again as domestic.
And people are always asking me, why are there relationships?
Why is there so much family?
And I'm sort of amazed that that could be a question.
And I also think it's not a question people ask of someone like, or would have asked of Raymond Carver.
It seems to me he wrote exclusively about family and relationships.
Why wouldn't they?
They didn't think of him first as domestic, they thought of him first as working class, and also of the stylistic aspect of his work, because he sort of revolutionized.
a short story in a certain way.
But his topic, his subject, was the relationship, was, you know, domestic life with how husbands and wives get along, and parents and children, and, you know, he turned outside to the economic life of people and how it pushed in on them, that sort of stuff.
Does this slightly upset you with that?
I think women are, you know, if they are doing this, they're seen as sort of
Except that the two reviews I'm thinking of were both written by women, you know, of Gayle Coughlin and that, and Michiko and Natasha.
No, I utterly agree that... It is interesting that, you know, when you mention that, but it is women who are bringing this up, aren't they, in the reviews?
You mustn't say this, but I think Gail Caldwell much prefers male writers, and the more macho the better, and she's just a complete sucker and writes this utterly ridiculous prose about someone like Tim O'Brien, because she sees him as this sort of hero.
But that's a nasty thing to say, and you must never quote.
I never discuss other reviews.
And why she chooses to review me, also, over and over again when she hates me.
With the same complaints.
But I do think
It is interesting, and don't worry about this.
I actually was misquoted once in Newsweek with this, quoting from Diane Johnson, who has a wonderful introduction to her collection of critical essays.
Critical essays, the title of the collection is Terrorists and Nautilists.
But in the introduction, she's talking about how
Everyone has known and has had to know all along how to read male fiction written by men and understands that when you're writing about a sailing voyage, that's a metaphor.
When you're writing about getting in a car and driving across the country to Colorado, that's a metaphor.
When you're writing about catching the great white whale, that's a metaphor.
You know, I went to view two weeks ago, Patrick O'Brien in New York, and he said, you know, when I'm writing about the ocean and living on a ship, he said, that's a metaphor.
Yeah.
But people aren't willing to see.
These aren't just stories of the bounding days.
It's a metaphor for people living in very close places, and it's really the same thing, isn't it?
Yeah, and people just aren't really, I mean, Diane Johnson's point was that people aren't willing to see, and she said men haven't learned to read the female metaphors, home, you know, garden, family, and I think women,
similarly haven't learned to read you this metaphor.
They're very dismissive.
I do think, in fact, female critics are much more dismissive, or even the people who embrace you, embrace you not because you're doing something ambitious, but because finally you're talking about women and children.
So I think the embraces by women is almost as difficult in some ways as the slap in the face by women who say you're just doing the same.
It's a curious, curious phenomenon.
Well, do you find that male reviewers probably had an ironic, paratoxical kind of way response?
They're much more careful, probably because they've been taught they have to be.
We're back on.
We were talking about something that was pretty interesting.
Men, women?
Yeah.
The way fiction gets seen.
You don't mind talking about these things.
I mean, I have a book.
and I wouldn't be here if I didn't like it and wanted to talk to you about it.
I am interested, however, in the characterization of the journalist, how she came into this.
She wasn't originally there, but then I actually read an article about a journalist who arrived to interview, not for the New Yorker, but for another magazine, the writer M.F.K.
Fisher.
Oh, she's great.
Yeah.
and arrived with his leg broken.
And that seemed to me just a tremendously interesting idea.
So I sort of began to fool around with Lynette.
Once I rejected the idea of Alan narrating it in the first person and realized I really wanted to be able to
move around among the characters.
Then this other idea seemed very possible, and the minute I sort of thought of Lynette, you know, I just invented her right away, sort of her own kind of, you know, slightly fluid moral sense.
I mean, I liked everyone in this book.
I loved writing about all of them.
I mean, I liked her, even though she was sort of
You know, she's someone who just is hustling to survive.
She's really, you know, and she hasn't had such a great life.
And she's, you know, I see her as someone kind of likable, almost present.
Talking in terms of architecture, is she essential?
Did you find me to see her as essential?
She certainly let me do certain things.
I think if I hadn't had her, I might have found other ways of doing them.
A journalist is good, isn't it?
I mean, as a device.
Yeah.
I mean, I might have just quoted some articles written about Lily.
I wanted to have that public perspective of Lily enter the book.
The thing which, you know, Alan had had to face, and his siblings had had to face, or his one sister anyway, which was encountering their mother this way, and a version of what that way was.
And it struck me that this would be this wonderful opportunity to actually include some journalism.
I like the idea, too, of writing in that voice, you know, kind of having that snazzy, jazzy, you know, kind of faster voice.
Sentence-to-sentence paragraphs, snapping.
But that was, in fact, the sort of public view of this character.
And that was one important... I mean, in part, I think the novel is about how we can or cannot know other people and how we can or cannot fully understand them.
And so I wanted to have a lot of different versions of Lily.
You know, the version that occurs in Paul's letters, the version that she wrote herself, the version that I tell as the narrator of this book.
And Lynette's version is just another...
way of looking at her.
And, you know, the problem for Alan is, sort of, who was Lily?
Who is Lily?
And then who was Lily?
And, you know, how can I love her and grieve her?
And, you know, even after she's dead, he keeps getting these new versions of Lily.
Now that we've articulated it, and as I think about it, it is an
an element in a lot of your work is this unlayering.
People see these layers of people.
The whole question of whether we can know one another.
In stages peeled away, we see almost like a photograph
and developing, and you use that as some... Yeah, in family pictures, yeah.
But that's the real interest of mine, is sort of, you know, self-understanding and the understanding of others, and how sort of desperately we struggle with that, and how sometimes by luck we sort of intuit another, but how often...
And I felt that way very much about both my parents.
I have a lot of both of their writings because they were both very prolific writers, my dad professionally and my mom just because she was.
And they just still feel like fundamentally mysteries to me.
But I think our parents probably more than anyone else.
I mean, we know them first in one such
clearly defined way and then we have to accommodate the sense that they had this long life before us and then they you know that they were changing even as we knew them and they're the most mysterious i think our parents and that's probably what interested me too when writing this book finally i've got two daughters one almost 14 they're 13 months apart yes but it's it's something to see
yourself or your kid's eyes.
Yeah.
Really, to try and do it.
I remember seeing my parents in my eyes.
I'm trying to see, I mean, do it.
My wife took my dust jacket picture.
Did a nice job.
I had a Jerry Bauer picture.
Oh, yeah.
They sent them up here.
Isn't that funny?
But I had it, but Colt doesn't want to pay for them.
Ah.
That's cool.
That's fine.
They'd rather spend the money on advertising.
Yeah.
Fine.
My wife said, but my kids were picking up.
She did a nice job.
And Jerry makes you like everything.
So she did fine.
I said, Father, what do you think?
And she said, Dad, no offense.
She said, but you look your age.
It's a thing you don't want to do.
And I said, and what might that be?
You know, where are we?
You know, how do I appear to a 14-year-old kid?
Yeah.
Old.
As an old teacher, to use her expression, I don't feel like an old teacher.
You know what we interviewed the day before yesterday was Mary Wesley.
an 80-something year old British writer who writes really sexy books.
You know, you're curious about this in a very delicate way, but she says, you know, where is it written that at the age of 70 you start being interested in sex or religion or whatever?
I can't try to paraphrase, but it was wonderful.
It was very good.
But would you say that the relationship between Alan and
and his mother is kind of a development of this concern that you were having as your parents moving along.
Yes, I mean, and the fact is that more sort of happens for Alan in terms of his understanding of his mother after she dies.
I mean, when she's there, he's not able to...
he's just sort of frozen in his own patterns vis-a-vis her, and he finds himself sort of reduced to boyhood again in a certain way in his resentment of her and in their kind of interaction they have.
And then, you know, there is this thing that I was sort of thinking of in the book, this sort of gift of memory, and I feel that very much with all the people who've died in my life, that
those particular resentments, those particular things, you can let go of them and remember the other parts of the person, which probably you couldn't have done in life.
I mean, they'd come around, they'd start in on you in the way they always did, or they'd say the wrong thing, and you'd be instantly irritated.
And I don't think that's sentimental.
There's one review that accused me of sentimentality.
It said if I'd been a more honest person, I would have said,
Because he didn't have a nice mother, he started to invent one after she died.
I mean, that's so misses what I thought my point was, which was that we do get chosen in these responses of people who are so important to us.
And we can't see the other side of them.
We can't find our way to the other side.
So we know they're there.
I do think that one of the great gifts of memory is that you recall the person whole, and you recall the things that you were sort of blinded to in life because they were new parents in particular, and they had such power, and they shaped you.
they came down on you in some ways and dismissed parts of you and that sort of thing and judged parts of you but i think that there is a release into not a sort of sufi love nothing like that but a kind of sense of how complex they were that they had other lives too you say and of course alan in this case you know has all this testimony of the many other kinds of lives that really live he has
all this written testimony of it, which was part of what I was trying to do, was to make it possible for someone in front of the reader to confront these other senses of a person who'd been just very, very difficult for him.
Had he been the narrator as he considered, it's not quite...
Certainly, structurally, it would have been a different book.
Very much, yeah.
I think he would have had to have found and read things.
I mean, I even feel Princess Gabby's perspective.
Once I'd written a little bit of Lily, I just sort of thought, no, I have to be able to inhabit Lily for some of his books.
Don't you think she still would have been the primary focus?
Well, I see them as sort of balanced.
I mean, Lily is, of course, in a certain way, the center of the book, and the book is titled after her.
The title of the character.
Yeah.
She's not a person who is changed or, you know, there's no dynamic around Lily in the curse of the book.
Everything that happens to her has been decided before, I mean, even her death, which happens in the curse of the book, but it's something that was decided and fixed.
This is something she knew she was going to do when she reached a certain stage in her life.
Whereas I saw Alan...
maybe is a less important character in the book, but is the person whose life changes or shifts because of what goes on in the book, and therefore is a sort of more dynamic character.
I mean, it changes only up to a point.
I mean, part of what I wanted to say was we can't utterly have a revelation that will utterly change our lives when we're 50 years old.
I mean, we have made lives which count on us being a certain way.
But he does, in fact, he is allowed to see things differently.
And he, well, he works to see things differently.
Had he narrated the book, I think that would have been the first time you'd have had a male narrated book, right?
Of a book.
I've had them, the long, short story in Inventing the Abbots was... This doesn't cow you in any way, intimidate you?
No.
No, and I thought the...
I did rites and prose in his voice, and I felt perfectly comfortable with it.
I mean, assuming male persona and male sexuality and all that, that doesn't intimidate you at all?
No, I feel, I mean, even in the third person, I sort of sat on, have done, I mean, I've had male characters, I think, who's deepest feeling, I mean, you know, David, the husband in family pictures, and Max, the son, and...
You know, I mean, there was one point which some friends were talking about with Doug, about my writing male characters, and this wonderful friend who's an artist actually said,
You know, I mean, it seems as though somehow you've found out about how men think.
And Doug said, yeah, doesn't I?
How did you find out?
I'm so pleased.
That is a compliment.
Yes.
And, I mean, obviously Doug said it as a joke, but, you know, I've grown up.
I've had two brothers.
I've been married twice.
You talk about deja vu.
I know I have these quotes from you.
I know we've discussed this.
This whole business of writing as a man.
Probably so.
Maybe because of family pictures.
Because it's interesting.
You told me what you did.
You did grow up in a household.
Yeah, and then, you know, I had a son, and I sort of watched his mind, which was at a certain point pretty transparent to me.
Later, he began to draw some curtains, and he's very good at it.
So he finally really established a kind of...
privacy process, poor guy.
But, you know, I think I sort of saw his mind kind of learning about the world in the way that a boy does.
And I just, I don't feel that that's so alien.
I, you know, I also don't feel that, and I think there was probably a time in our lives when, you know, women
lives and men's lives were so different that one was not very imaginable to the other.
But that's in the last, certainly in the last 30 or 40 years, the country has changed.
I mean, men have always been privileged to imagine the female life, some of the greatest books in the literature, the male imagining of the female.
I mean, and you look at Hemingway just describing women, it's almost Latin.
And he didn't, he couldn't do it.
But when you look at Flaubert, when you look at Tolstoy, I mean, there are some people whose greatest books... Even Fitzgerald, to a degree, I think.
Well, they were sort of iconic, since his work.
Of Proust.
He had it, didn't he?
My wife just finished the Flaubert biography.
The Balzac, I'm sorry.
It was only before that, but...
She did the Flobert, then she did the Balzac, and now she's doing the Bronte, which I just read.
What's the last one?
The new Bronte by Linda Gordon, which is wonderful.
I haven't read it.
I've read a lot of biographies of her, but not that much.
This one is excellent.
I had never read it before.
Before you talk about, here are three sisters writing a lot of men's names, you know, and when they found out, I mean, Zachary became so vicious.
She was angry.
This is a woman.
I mean, she was all this.
anger and emotion.
I mean, they really resented the fact that she didn't express things that they were maybe even better than they were doing.
But I think in part it was because her brother was so accessible to her.
I mean, they were all sort of in each other's minds from the very early stages.
You should really read that book.
It's very funny.
The circumstances of their lives are just so fascinating, and the death, the death, the death.
Yes, talk about death-ridden.
She has the saddest life I think I've ever read.
I just, you know.
I mean, I didn't read that one, I think, but I've read others.
That horrible old man.
Forgive me if we haven't really, but we have actually.
Yeah, we're doing good.
I know that they may leave, you know.
You've got your lead.
I never lead one of these things.
What's your lead going to be?
Oh, I never say.
Because I reserve the right to change it.
But I always feel I'm in good shape when I have my lead.
I always like to
come back to where I started, in one way or another.
No, I guess I don't know what that is.
I sort of imagined it was with this character, Lynette, you know, kind of what she would need to get herself going in the story she was writing.
And that was really fun, you know.
She's not nice.
No, she's not.
She's kind of horrible.
I've known a lot of journalists like her, I have to say, of both sexes, and it was irrelevant with sex.
I mean,
My agent said, you know, oh, and then she goes in and looks into their bedroom.
And I said, why is that?
That's not surprising at all.
Me too.
She loves you.
My editor, Alan, he comes in and says, oh, you have this detail.
You describe this woman I have, this woman who is so cessful of Lincoln.
Louise Taper, Mark Taper.
Have you heard of Mark Taper in LA, the Mark Taper poem?
Yes.
She's the third, second...
wife of this baritaker who's better than winning the Mega Bucks.
And all of a sudden, she was able to indulge this passion for Abraham Lincoln.
And for 10 years, she put together this collection at the Huntington Library for the first time ever.
They mounted an exhibition last year of her stuff, their stuff, and the Illinois, and 300,000 people.
She has everything.
So she sort of acquired it by buying?
By buying.
Memorabilia and documents.
But better than that, because she has a focus.
She knows about it.
She understands.
She wants all the Mary Lincoln stuff.
She wants all the John Wilkes Booth stuff.
She wants all the... She has all the... She has the earliest notebook of Abraham.
She has this... She does have things.
She has an emancipation crop.
And she's just... How do we get on to this?
But I mean...
They say about her, she collects like a man.
Come on.
Women collect like men all the time.
They're the collectors, after all.
She's great.
I love you.
Why did I bring her up?
Coming around to women and men.
Nope.
Yeah, I think so.
Too much wine.
Well, it's Friday, you know.
It's Friday, but I have to do one more kind of telephone interview.
Oh, really?
Actually, you know, it is really true.
I mean, I really hate being on tour, and I really hate doing interviews.
I mean, I don't drink very much, but I always have had a little bit to drink.
Really?
Yeah.
I mean, I just... To loosen up.
Yeah, because otherwise I'm so... I just get... I find myself sort of being very snippy to people sometimes.
Last week, when we were shooting these pictures, my wife was in the morning, the kids were in school.
She says, here, have a glass of wine.
I said, why?
Because we shot some pictures.
She says, you've got to loosen up a little bit.
She says, you're too stiff.
You're too nervous.
You're too anxious.
You're trying to look too much like the obvious.
And the second group of pictures were wonderful.
As wonderful as they can get.
I think it's true.
Often, I think, the best ones come at the very end of some long, arduous session.
It's just that it affects the photographer's
And the equivalent of giving you a glass of wine, you should sort of warn you about it.
And I also know that she had one good one from the previous two.
That was reassuring, yes.
So we were trying to get the next one.
She did.
It was great.
What do you think?
Can we cover it?
I feel fine.
Yeah, I get plenty of stuff.
Yeah, I mean, I do think, in fact, you have so much from the other record.
I mean, you did mention that certain people did die close to you, and you just kind of saw them have to wonder who they might be.
Make it as specific or as general as you want.
Yeah, a few friends, but in the last...
Five years in my family's life, my grandmother, who was sort of the mother of all mothers to me,
really sort of taught me what to be maternal was, died at the age of 94, my grandfather at the age of 96, and my own father at the age of, I think, 70.
He was the one sort of in my immediate care.
And when was that?
He died three years ago.
And my grandfather was still alive after my father died.
Your grandfather was not his...
My mother died long ago.
I mean, both her parents outlived her family.
Years and years, I think that was just awful.
They outlived several of their children.
Because my mother's generation was, you know, smoked cigarettes, hard drinking, and my grandparents' generation, I mean, plus all the environmental insults we may not know anything about, I'm sure, you know, whatever that may be.
You know, my grandparents were teetotalers, and certainly they never slept.
They were just sort of full of virtue.
I think you covered a lot of this, obviously.
That's good.
I got plenty.
I guess, you know, your first book was published, when, about 10 years ago?
86.
I finished it in 86.
So, did you conceive of an uber at that point?
No, no.
And do you now see...
Everything is part of a body of work.
Well, I feel I've kind of run a certain course, just in terms of this, I guess, biographical reflection.
We could take the check when you're ready.
Or I'll take the check when you're ready.
Biographical reflection on my own life.
And for the first time, I don't have an idea for a novel in my head.
I want to do some short stories.
In part, I think... Usually, as I approach the end of the novel that I'm working on, I'm beginning to sort of...
I passed around a little bit in my nervousness.
And I just didn't really at the end of the book.
In part, I knew there were sort of a lot of life things coming up.
We were building a house, so I knew I'd be very engaged in that.
And we got a dog, and I was very engaged in that.
And, you know, there were just these...
And I'm reading for a literary prize, so I knew that that would take up a lot of my time.
And indeed, it will.
I did one of those.
It's terrible.
You had 200 books.
I'm just reading 60, but I have to read them by mid-June.
So, you know, I knew that I wouldn't really be working right now.
But on the other hand... Are you anxious about that, though?
Well, not.
But yes, also I am.
I mean, I feel kind of relaxed about it, but I also think... I feel...
in a certain way that I don't know what I'll do next.
That's all.
I don't know what I'll do next.
And I feel as though I might do something.
Is that a disquieting feeling or is that a liberating feeling?
I worry a little, but on the other hand, I have a sort of sense of, you know, steps in life that, you know, I will always be trying to do something.
You know what I mean?
I don't, well, anyway.
But one shouldn't deduce from that that you feel somehow that
This body of work is... You've said the stuff that you want to say.
No, but I actually used this analogy with someone else just the other day, but it occurred to me, and I think it's apt, that, you know, if you sort of look at... My work is sort of reflecting these various autobiographical concerns.
I feel as though I've finished my rabbit series.
And...
That's all I've done.
I mean, Updike has a lot of other things in and around and about the Rabbit series, but I sort of feel as though the books that I've written have come very much out of these intensely personal concerns.
And that I'm... Is this Rabbit at Rest, then?
Well, yeah.
I mean, Lily is me.
Alan is me, too.
I mean, I imagine myself being her.
And, I mean, I think I've done it very differently from the way I've done it, certainly.
And I wouldn't want to even try to, you know, seem to be comparing myself to him, because there are those who would not like that in both directions.
But I feel as though somehow a certain ending has come around in my work.
You're making a comparison, which I think is different.
Yeah, yeah.
So...
I feel I've sort of completed a certain body of work in some sense or another.
And I'm not sure what the next step is.
Was this a mindful excursion in that part?
No, it wasn't.
I mean, I sort of only, as I kind of came to the end of this book and really sort of thought...
You know, and I've talked about this a lot to Doug, you know, like, I don't have an idea now.
What's wrong?
You know, and he has been very reassuring.
I know you've written, you know, five books in ten years, and maybe it's time to, yeah, to take a deep breath, and, you know, so... This is the end quote, by the way.
Oh, a deep breath?
I mean, I say sometimes I have my lead, and then I have my kicker.
Uh-huh.
He gave it to me, thanks.